Operation Desert Storm, popularly known as the first Gulf War, was the successful U.S.-Allied response to Iraq's attempt to overwhelm neighboring Kuwait. Kuwait's liberation in 1991 brought to the battlefield a new era of military technology. Nearly all battles were aerial and ground combat within Iraq, Kuwait, and outlying areas of Saudi Arabia. Iraq inflicted little damage on the American coalition; however, they fired missiles on Israeli citizens.

Blackhawk helicopters in Saudi Arabia

History

At the request of the Kuwaitis, Kuwait had become a British Protectorate in 1889. British forces protected the area until 1961. Kuwait was a part of Iraq until 1923, when borders were drawn. On June 19, 1961, British protection ended and Kuwait joined the Arab League. Iraq objected strongly and claimed that Kuwait was part of their territory. Kuwait formed its own constitution on January 1963. Accordingly, the emir held the executive power, organized with a group of ministers. By January 23, a national assembly was elected. By October, 1963, Iraq gave up its claim on Kuwait. Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein wanted to regain that lost land for Iraq, and so he invaded.

Leading up to war

Washington, D.C., January 17, 2001 – On the morning of August 2, 1990 the mechanized infantry, armor, and tank units of the Iraqi Republican Guard invaded Kuwait and seized control of that country.  The invasion triggered a United States response, Operation DESERT SHIELD, to deter any invasion of Kuwait's oil rich neighbor, Saudi Arabia.  On August 7, deployment of U.S. forces began.  United Nations Security Council Resolutions 660 and 662 condemned Iraq's invasion and annexation and called for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi forces.  On August 20 President Bush signed National Security Directive 45, "U.S. Policy in Response to the Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait," outlining U.S. objectives - which included the "immediate, complete, and unconditional withdrawal of all Iraqi forces from Kuwait," and the "restoration of Kuwait's legitimate government to replace the puppet regime installed by Iraq."1

A U.N. ultimatum, Security Council Resolution 678, followed on November 29, 1990.  It stipulated that if Iraqi dictator Persian Gulf War, also called Gulf War, 
Persian Gulf War: U.S. Marines entering Kuwait [Credit: © Christopher Morris—Black Star/PNI]
(1990–91), international conflict that was triggered by Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait on August 2, 1990. Iraq’s leader, ?addam ?ussein, ordered the invasion and occupation of Kuwait with the apparent aim of acquiring that nation’s large oil reserves, canceling a large debt Iraq owed Kuwait, and expanding Iraqi power in the region. On August 3 the United Nations Security Council called for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, and on August 6 the council imposed a worldwide ban on trade with Iraq. (The Iraqi government responded by formally annexing Kuwait on August 8.) Iraq’s invasion and the potential threat it then posed to Saudi Arabia, the world’s largest oil producer and exporter, prompted the United States and its western European NATO allies to rush troops to Saudi Arabia to deter a possible attack. Egypt and several other Arab nations joined the anti-Iraq coalition and contributed forces to the military buildup, known as Operation Desert Shield. Iraq meanwhile built up its occupying army in Kuwait to about 300,000 troops.

On January 16, 1991, Operation Desert Storm began. The conflict, as know as the Gulf War, was waged by a U.N.-authorized coalition force from 34 nations led by the United States, in response to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait. On February 28, 1991, President Bush declared suspension of offensive combat and laid out conditions for permanent cease-fire. Check out the timeline below for a snapshot of events that took place during this time:

Day 1: Wednesday, Jan. 16

    Desert Storm begins at 7 p.m. EST (3 a.m. Jan. 17 in Iraq) with massive air and missile attacks on targets in Iraq, Kuwait.
    President Bush: “We will not fail.”

Day 2: Thursday, Jan. 17

    Iraqi President Saddam Hussein declares: “The great showdown has begun! The mother of all battles is under way.”
    Iraqi Scud missiles strike Israel.
    Scud fired at Saudi Arabia is downed by U.S. Patriot missile – first anti- missile missile fired in combat.

Day 3: Friday, Jan. 18

    Amid retaliation speculation, President Bush says Israel has promised not to respond to Iraq’s attack.

Day 4: Saturday, Jan. 19

    At least three Scuds explode in Tel Aviv, Israel, injuring about 17. Israel vows to defend itself but refrains. United States rushes in Patriots, making Army crews first U.S. soldiers to defend Israel.
    U.S. troops raid oil platforms off Kuwait, capturing first Iraqi prisoners of war.

Day 5: Sunday, Jan. 20

    Iraqi TV airs interviews with captured allied airmen.
    Iraq fires 10 Scuds at Saudi Arabia; nine are intercepted, one falls offshore.

Screaming Eagles Attack Village

Day 6: Monday, Jan. 21

    U.S. officials say despite more than 8,000 sorties in five days, elusive mobile Scud missile launchers remain a threat.
    Iraq says it has scattered prisoners of war as shields at allied air targets.

Day 7: Tuesday, Jan. 22

    Iraq fires six Scud missiles at Saudi Arabia; one is destroyed by Patriot, others fall harmlessly.
    Iraq torches Kuwaiti oil wells, tanks.
    A Scud eludes U.S. Patriot missiles and hits Tel Aviv. Three people die.

Day 8: Wednesday, Jan. 23

    U.S. officials deny Saddam Hussein’s claim that allies bombed baby-formula plant, saying plant was a chemical factory.
    Iraq fires Scuds at Israel and Saudi Arabia; no casualties.
    President Bush urges Saddam Hussein be brought to “justice,” suggesting removal of Iraqi president could be a goal.

Day 9: Thursday, Jan. 24

    Number of allied sorties surpasses 15,000.
    Saudi officials report two oil slicks moving south of Kuwait. Allies say Iraq released oil; Iraq blames allied bombs.

Day 10: Friday, Jan. 25

    Japan says it will send military aircraft to assist allies in non-combat situations.
    Scud missiles are fired at Israel and Saudi Arabia. Two people killed.

Day 11: Saturday, Jan. 26

    Massive oil spill grows, threatening Saudi Arabia’s industrial and desalination plants and gulf environment.
    Iraqi warplanes land in Iran. Iran says it has seized them.
    U.S. F-15s enter war’s first major dogfight, shoot down three Iraqi MiG- 23s.
    Pentagon confirms USS Louisville is first sub to launch cruise missile in combat.
    Scuds fired at Israel and Saudi Arabia; no casualties.
    More than 75,000 protesters march in Washington, D.C.

Day 12: Sunday, Jan. 27

    Allies bomb Iraqi-held oil facilities in Kuwait to stop Iraq from dumping oil into gulf.
    Amid fears of terrorism, Super Bowl XXV goes off without a hitch.

Day 13: Monday, Jan. 28

    Iraq says captured allied pilots have been injured in allied bombing raids.

Day 14: Tuesday, Jan. 29

    In largest ground battle yet, battalion-size force of U.S. Marines (up to 800) fire artillery, mortars, TOW missiles, at Iraqi bunkers half-mile away in Kuwait. No U.S. casualties.
    United States, Soviet Union issue communique offering Iraq cease-fire if it makes “unequivocal commitment” to withdraw.

Day 15: Wednesday, Jan. 30

    Scores of Iraqi tanks, thousands of troops advance into Saudi Arabia. Attacks are countered by U.S. Marines, Saudi and Qatari troops. Eleven Marines die.
    Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, allied commander, says allies have air supremacy and are reducing Scud threat.

Day 16: Thursday, Jan. 31

    Saudi and Qatari troops, backed by U.S. artillery, retake Khafji, Saudi Arabia.
    Sheik Abdul-Aziz Bin Baz, Saudis’ leading interpreter of Islamic law, calls Saddam Hussein “enemy of God.”

Day 17: Friday, Feb. 1

    Allies bomb 10-mile-long Iraqi armored column headed into Saudi Arabia.

Day 18: Saturday, Feb. 2

    Two Scuds hit central Israel; no casualties. Patriot downs Scud over Saudi Arabia; two injured.

Day 19: Sunday, Feb. 3

    Allied air campaign passes 40,000-sortie mark – 10,000 more missions than were flown against Japan in final 14 months of World War II.

Day 20: Monday, Feb. 4

    Iran offers to mediate peace talks, resume official relations with United States.
    Battleship Missouri fires at Iraqi positions inside Kuwait – first time ship has fired in combat since Korean War.
