A dry cough is a type of cough which does not produce any mucus or phlegm. It is closely related to tickly coughs and often, these terms are used interchangeably. Read about the causes, remedies and what you should be looking out for when you have a dry cough.


Both dry coughs and tickly coughs are known as non-productive coughs, as distinct from chesty coughs where mucus is produced.

A dry cough is most often the result of infection by cold and flu viruses. It can also be triggered by atmospheric pollutants (such as cigarette smoke) irritating your throat. In most of these situations, dry coughs occur because the back of your throat (or pharynx) becomes irritated or inflamed, but may also arise from deeper in the chest.




The most common causes of a dry cough are the viral infections we know as the common cold and flu. These coughs may occur at the start of the illness or most often, towards the middle or the end of the infection.

Other causes of a dry cough include:

    Side-effect of medication – some medicines, particularly those for high blood pressure, can result in a dry cough
    Hayfever - this is an allergy to grass and tree pollen. It sets off inflammation in the eyes and nose. Sometimes, this inflammation can also affect the deeper tissues in the chest, leading to a dry cough.
    Psychological conditions – this is when coughing has become a habit. It is also sometimes referred to as a psychogenic cough. There is no physical illness behind the cough and often the person does not even realise he or she is coughing. A feature of this type of cough is that it goes away when one is asleep
    Nerves and stress – many people cough when they are in a stressful situation. Breathing becomes shallow when you are anxious and this can trigger the cough reflex. Some people tend to be more anxious than others, and for them the ‘natural’ nervous cough can become a problem if they find themselves in uncomfortable situations. Often, the underlying problem will have to be addressed in order to cure the dry cough.


